CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNERADINO

Fall Term 2016

Course No. : CSE 440

Course Title : Game Design

Prerequisite : CSE 330 (Data Structures)

Units : 4 units

Meetings : 12:00 – 12:50 pm Lec, TR, JB 360

12:50 – 01:50 pm Lab, TR, JB 360

Instructor/Office/Phone & Fax/E-mail/Office Hours/Lab Assistant and
Office Hours:

Dr. A.I. Concepcion

JB343

Voice: 909.537.5330

Fax: 909.537.7004

[*concep@csusb.edu*](mailto:concep@csusb.edu)

04:00 – 06:00 pm, Tue/Thu

Objectives:

The creation of video games has become an area of much focus. Games are
being used as a platform for entertainment, education, and training
among many other disciplines and recreational activities. This course
will introduce topics revolving around how an idea of a game is
transformed into an actual game. The course describes how an
understanding of core concepts in video games are put together, and will
provide adequate information and training necessary toward becoming a
professional Game Designer.

*The general objective of the course is to introduce the different game
design and programming concepts, tools, and methodologies to enable the
students to write a game design document and build a prototype of their
proposed video game.*

The specific objectives of the course are:

\(a) To learn how to write game design documentation.

> \(b) To develop a prototype of the proposed video game.

\(c) To specify game play and mechanics.

\(d) To learn about game design principles.

\(e) To learn the use of Unity game development tool and the C\#
programming language.

\(f) To introduce several video games under development by students of
CSUSB.

\(g) To understand the concept of computational thinking in game
development.

Text:

“Fundamentals of Game Design,” 3^rd^ Edition, Ernest Adams, New
Riders*,* 2014.

Requirements:

-   Completion and submission of assigned lab exercises.

<!-- -->

-   Completion and submission of game design document.

<!-- -->

-   Presentation and demo of prototype of proposed video game.

<!-- -->

-   Attendance.

Each class meeting will be divided down into two parts, a lecture period
and a lab session. The lectures will consist of traditional lectures
taken from textbooks and references. There could be invited guest
speakers of alumni giving presentations and demonstrations.

The lab sessions will consist of exercise activities focused on learning
the Unity3D game engine and then later, proposing and designing a video
game complete with documentation.

Lab assignments and exercises are to be done and turned in individually
via the GitHub accounts you will create. Collaboration in the lab
periods for problem solving and gaining further knowledge are
encouraged.

Plagiarism will not be tolerated and the grade for plagiarizing is zero.
Cheating on lab assignments and exercises, which is defined as directly
and obviously copying someone else’s code or utilizing the exact same
scene/game layout from another student or team, will be considered
plagiarism.

Presentations will be conducted both at the middle and end of the
course. Each team will present the game design document in a
professional manner, which is complete with powerpoint slides and demo
of the game prototype. Areas of grading for the presentation will
include quality, professionalism, and content.

Deadlines consist of completed lab work, required documentations, and
submitted prototype of proposed video game. As there are designated due
dates, late work will incur a penalty of 10% per school day late.

*If you are in need of an accommodation for a disability in order to
participate in this class, please contact Services to Students with
Disabilities at UH-183, 909.537.5238.*

Grading:

The following is the formula to be used in computing your final average
in the course:

*FA = 0.30 Prototype + 0.30 GameDesignDocument* + *0.35 LabWork*

> + *0.05 Attendance*

where *FA* = final average.

  -------------------------------
  **Final Average**   **Grade**
  =================   =========
  ------------------- -----------
  *94 and above*      A
                      =

  90-93.9             A-
                      ==

  87-89.9             B+
                      ==

  *84-86.9*           B
                      =

  *80-83.9*           B-
                      ==

  77-79.9             C+
                      ==

  *74-76.9*           C
                      =

  70-73.9             C-
                      ==

  67-69.9             D+
                      ==

  64-66.9             D
                      =

  60-63.9             D-
                      ==

  Below 59.9          F
  ==========          =
  -------------------------------

COURSE OUTLINE

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  WEEK     TOPICS                                                      REQUIREMENTS
  -------- ----------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
  22 Sep   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapter 1
                                                                       
           -- Games and Video Games                                    

  27 Sep   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 2 and 3
                                                                       
  29 Sep   -- Designing and Developing Games                           -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- The Major Genres                                         
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- Introduction to Unity                                    
                                                                       
           -- Unity tutorials and exercises                            

  04 Oct   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 4 and 5
                                                                       
  06 Oct   -- Understanding Your Player                                -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- Understanding Your Machine                               
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- Unity tutorials and exercises                            

  11 Oct   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 6 and 7
                                                                       
  13 Oct   -- Making Money from Your Game                              -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- Game Concepts                                            
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- Unity tutorials and exercises                            

  18 Oct   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 8 and 9
                                                                       
  20 Oct   -- Game Worlds                                              -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- Creative and Expressive Play                             
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- “Hello World”, Input and Movement, Textures and Assets   

  25 Oct   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 10 and 11
                                                                       
  27 Oct   -- Character Development                                    -- Present game design of
                                                                       
           -- Storytelling                                             proposed game
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- Creating a Game World                                    

  01 Nov   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapters 12 and 13
                                                                       
  03 Nov   -- Creating the User Experience                             -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           -- Gameplay                                                 
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- Physics, Collisions, Triggers                            

  08 Nov   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapter 14
                                                                       
  10 Nov   -- Core Mechanics                                           -- Unity assignments
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         
                                                                       
           -- Audio and GUI                                            

  15 Nov   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapter 15
                                                                       
  17 Nov   *--* Game Balancing                                         -- Show progress on proposed
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         game
                                                                       
           -- Develop prototype of proposed game                       

  22 Nov   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapter 16
                                                                       
  24 Nov   *--* General Principles of Level Design                     -- Show progress on proposed
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         game
                                                                       
           -- Develop prototype of proposed game                       

  29 Nov   Lecture                                                     -- Read Chapter 17
                                                                       
  01 Dec   *--* Design Issues for Online Gaming                        -- Show progress on proposed
                                                                       
           Lab                                                         game
                                                                       
           -- Develop prototype of proposed game                       

  08 Dec   Finals day (12 – 1:50 pm)                                   Demo of game prototype
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


